---
layout: post
title: Change Management and Project Management
date: '2007-05-07T10:08:00.000-07:00'
author: Larry Reid
tags:
- Project Management
modified_time: '2007-05-07T10:52:13.542-07:00'
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5778824359157275227.post-6902643820800508650
blogger_orig_url: http://technopragmatica.blogspot.com/2007/05/change-management-and-project.html
---

I heard a good talk on Friday that identified for me a real tension
between change management and project management. That wasn't the point
of the talk. The presenters were just presenting change management in
the context of a major health care IT initiative that's underway in BC.
However, their words of guidance to project managers triggered some
thoughts.  
  
To avoid confusion: We're talking here about "change management" in the
sense of how to help people change the way they work, typically with the
introduction of new technology. We're not talking about change
management as in the management of changes to IT infrastructure itself. 

  
The presentation showed the "Six Human Needs" that you had to look at
when undertaking major workplace changes. First on the list was the need
to be heard and have control. To give people control means they might
change what the project has to do. The tension is that our standard
project management approach in IT hates scope change. We have mechanisms
to handle scope change, but we certainly don't encourage it.  
  
I think there are a lot of situations where this sort of creative
tension actually leads to a good result: The change management people
will bring good ideas back to the project team. The project manager will
push back due to budget constraints, and the customer will get the
"best" result.  
  
This puts a lot of pressure on the scope change decision-making process.
You have to get those trade-offs between scope and budget mostly right.
In my experience, it's been really hard to get the right people to take
the time to truly work through an issue and come to a reasoned
conclusion on that type of issue.  
  
I think this is an area where the IT industry's "best practices" need to
be improved. As a project manager, you're pretty much between a rock and
a hard place when you get the change management input. If more projects
would formally recognize the exploratory stage that most require before
confirming budgets and scope, we'd be a lot better. Not being a <span
class="blsp-spelling-error" id="SPELLING_ERROR_0">PMP</span>, I don't
know if the Project Management Institute (<span
class="blsp-spelling-error" id="SPELLING_ERROR_1">PMI</span>) has done a
lot of work on the quality of a change management process, as opposed to
the existence of one. I'd be interested in hearing what they've done.  
  
By the way, the talk was part of BC Health Information Management
Professionals Society ([<span class="blsp-spelling-error"
id="SPELLING_ERROR_2">BCHIMPS</span>][1]) spring education session on
Friday. The <span class="blsp-spelling-error"
id="SPELLING_ERROR_3">BCHIMPS</span> spring and fall education sessions
are excellent meetings for anyone involved in health care IT in BC.



[1]: http://www.bchimps.bc.ca/
