---
layout: post
title: Privacy and the Cloud
date: '2010-05-07T19:07:00.000-07:00'
author: Larry Reid
tags:
- IT Infrastructure
- Cloud
modified_time: '2010-12-27T09:18:27.572-08:00'
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5778824359157275227.post-7919278940059205204
blogger_orig_url: http://technopragmatica.blogspot.com/2010/05/privacy-and-cloud.html
---

A friend pointed me at articles from the Privacy Commissioners of
[Canada][1] and [Ontario][2] about cloud computing. They raise some
interesting points. By and large they're good articles and raise points
that you should consider.  
  
I want to put a bit of context around them. I don't think the cloud
should be dismissed because of privacy concerns, but I wouldn't blindly
jump onto the cloud, either.  
  
The article from the Privacy Commissioner of Canada had quite a few
comments that weren't directly related to privacy, and I think some of
them need to be looked at.  
  
First, the Privacy Commissioner for Canada states that cloud computing
can mean an on-going cost instead of one-time fee. But there is no such
thing as a one-time fee in computing. Your computing gear lasts three to
five years. You need to replace it, and you need to service it while you
own it. It's much better in computing to convert your costs to a monthly
cost, either by using the lease price, or by using the depreciation that
your accountant would use.  
  
Consumer lack of control refers to the challenge of moving from one
cloud provider to another. For example, you want to take your blog from
Blogger to Wordpress. It's an absolutely important point to consider
with cloud computing. It's also an absolutely important point to
consider when you use proprietary software (e.g. Microsoft) on your own
equipment. There is a roughly equivalent amount of technical effort to
switch to a different platform in either scenario.  
  
In fact, technically you always have a way to get your data from a web
site. The terms of service of the web site may prevent it, but
technically you can do it. That's not always the case with a
proprietary, in-house solution.   
  
  
Compromising meaningful consent refers to the fact that the cloud tends
towards a single provider of most services: Facebook, Google (for
search), Twitter are all dominant in their sphere. However, twenty-five
years of Microsoft wasn't exactly a world of diversity, either. Again,
it's the monoculture that's undesirable, not the means by which we
arrive at a monoculture.  
  
Most of the Ontario Privacy Commissioner's paper is actually about
identity. I am not by any means an expert on identity. I learned some
interesting things from the Ontario Privacy Commissioner's paper.  
  
One point I'd like to draw your attention to: Identity is impossible
without the cloud, or at least the Internet. Most of the effective,
practical identity mechanisms rely on an trusted third party. I believe
the experts can demonstrate that this is required. You need the Internet
to get to the trusted third party, and that third party is effectively a
cloud service.  
  
(What I mean by "practical" in the previous sentence is to rule out the
public/private key approaches that work, but are too much of a pain for
even most geeks to use.)  
  
  
Finally, I want to step away from the privacy commissioners and talk
about one aspect of the cloud debate: Many IT people are reluctant to
embrace the cloud. [Here][3] is an example of IT backlash against the
cloud. It's important to remember that IT jobs will disappear as users
migrate to the cloud. If you work in a 4,000 person organization you
probably have a couple of people working full-time to support Exchange
(the back end of your e-mail system). If your organization used gmail,
they wouldn't be needed.   
  
What's that got to do with privacy? Well, it affects the cases that the
IT experts bring forward. For example, you'll hear about the Chinese
infiltration of gmail (attack on a cloud service), but you won't be
reminded about the Chinese attacks on Tibetan nationalist and
supporters, which was primarily about compromise people's personal
computer.  
  
I know that Google has way smarter people than me working on security,
and they do it full time. I think I have a reasonably secure network,
but I don't even have time to monitor it to see if I'm being
compromised. Security and privacy will be a differentiating factor in
the evolution of cloud providers. The market advantage will go to those
who provide the level of privacy their customers desire.  
  
In the proprietary, self-hosted world, security and privacy are usually
the last thing that gets any resources, because the competitive
pressures are always something else.



[1]: http://www.priv.gc.ca/information/pub/cc_201003_e.cfm
[2]: http://www.ipc.on.ca/images/Resources/privacyintheclouds.pdf
[3]: http://searchwindowsserver.techtarget.com/news/article/0,289142,sid68_gci1510373,00.html
